src/if-run/builtins/interpolation/README.md, before:

# Interpolation Plugin

## Overview

Interpolation is a way to infer new data points from a previously known set of points.
This plugin provides the `y` value at a given `x` by interpolating between known points. You provide a set of known `x`s and `y`s and a target `x`, the plugin returns the `y` for your `x`.

## Usage

To employ the `Interpolation` plugin, adhere to these steps:

1. **Initialize Plugin**: Import the `Interpolation` function and initialize it with global configuration parameters `method`, `x`, `y`, `input-parameter` and `output-parameter`.

2. **Execute Plugin**: Invoke the `execute` method of the initialized plugin instance with an array of input parameters. Each input parameter should include a `timestamp`, `duration` and `[input-parameter]` information.

3. **Result**: The plugin will return an array of plugin parameters enriched with the calculated average carbon intensity for each input.

## Global Config

- `method`: specifies the interpolation method for the data. Acceptable values are 'linear', 'spline', or 'polynomial'. The default method is linear. (optional)
- `x`: array of x points. Numbers should be in ascending order (required).
- `y`: array of y points. Numbers should be in ascending order (required).
- `input-parameter`: a string defining the name to use its value to calculate the interpolation. It should match an existing key in the inputs array (required).
- `output-parameter`: a string defining the name to use to add the result of interpolation with additional calculation (required).

`x` and `y` arrays must be equal lengths.

## Plugin parameter metadata

The `parameter-metadata` section contains information about `description` and `unit` of the parameters of the inputs and outputs

- `inputs`: describe the parameter of the `input-parameter` of the global config. The parameter has the following attributes:

  - `description`: description of the parameter
  - `unit`: unit of the parameter

- `outputs`: describe the parameters of the `output-parameter` of the global config. The parameter has the following attributes:
  - `description`: description of the parameter
  - `unit`: unit of the parameter

## Input Parameters

The plugin expects the following input parameters:

- `timestamp`: a timestamp for the input (required)
- `duration`: the amount of time, in seconds, that the input covers. (required)
- `[input-parameter]` - a field whose name matches the string provided to input-parameter in global config (i.e. if the input-parameter in global config is cpu/utilisation then cpu-utilisation must exist in the input data)

## Output

The plugin outputs a value `z` that is the result of looking up the `y` value at `x = 'input-parameter'` using the user-defined interpolation method in `kWh` units. `z` is assigned to a field with a name defined by `output-parameter` in the output data.

## Error Handling

The plugin conducts input validation using the `zod` library and may throw errors if the provided parameters are invalid.

## Plugin Algorithm

1. **Execution**:

   - Validate Global config

     - `method` - validates if the method is one of these methods: `linear`, `spline`, or `polynomial`. If the method isn’t provided, it sets to `linear`.
     - `x` and `y` should be arrays of numbers, the length should be equal, and elements should be ordered in the ascendant order.
     - `input-parameter` - validates if the parameter is string.
     - `output-parameter` - validates if the parameter is string.

   - Iterate through each input, and do corresponding validation and calculation.

   - Validate input parameters

     - `duration` - validate if the duration is a number
     - `timestamp` - should be in string or date format
     - `[input-parameter]` - validates whether the parameter name is included in the input, and if its value should be a number within the range of x points.

   - Calculation

     - If the `method` is provided, choose the right way to calculate. For the `linear` and `polynomial` methods, calculate according to their formulas. For spline interpolation, use the npm module `typescript-cubic-spline`.

2. **Output**: Output the provided input along with the calculated `cpu/energy`

### TypeScript Usage

```ts
const globalConfig = {
  method: 'linear',
  x: [0, 10, 50, 100],
  y: [0.12, 0.32, 0.75, 1.02],
  'input-parameter': 'cpu/utilization'
  'output-parameter': 'cpu/energy'

};

const interpolationPlugin = Interpolation(globalConfig);

const inputs = [
  {
    timestamp: '2024-04-16T12:00:00Z',
    duration: 3600,
    'cpu/utilization': 45
  },
];

const results = interpolationPlugin.execute(inputs);

console.log(results);
```

### Manifest Usage

#### Input

```yaml
name: interpolation-demo
description: simple demo of interpolation plugin
tags:
initialize:
  plugins:
    interpolation:
      method: Interpolation
      path: 'builtin'
      global-config:
        method: linear
        x: [0, 10, 50, 100]
        y: [0.12, 0.32, 0.75, 1.02]
        input-parameter: 'cpu/utilization'
        output-parameter: 'cpu/energy'
tree:
  children:
    child:
      pipeline:
        - interpolation
      inputs:
        - timestamp: 2023-07-06T00:00
          duration: 3600
          cpu/utilization: 45
```

#### Output

```yaml
name: interpolation-demo
description: simple demo of interpolation plugin
tags:
initialize:
  plugins:
    interpolation:
      method: Interpolation
      path: 'builtin'
      global-config:
        method: linear
        x: [0, 10, 50, 100]
        y: [0.12, 0.32, 0.75, 1.02]
        input-parameter: 'cpu/utilization'
        output-parameter: 'cpu/energy'
tree:
  children:
    child:
      pipeline:
        - interpolation
      inputs:
        - timestamp: 2023-07-06T00:00
          duration: 3600
          cpu/utilization: 45
      outputs:
        - timestamp: 2023-07-06T00:00
          duration: 3600
          cpu/utilization: 45
          cpu/energy: 0.00069625
```

You can execute this by passing it to `ie`. Run the impact using the following command from the project root:

```sh
npm i -g @grnsft/if
if-run --manifest ./manifests/examples/interpolation.yml --output ./manifests/outputs/interpolation.yml
```

## Errors

`Interpolation` exposes one of IF's error classes.

## `GlobalConfigError`

### GlobalConfigError

You will receive an error starting `GlobalConfigError: ` if you have not provided the expected configuration data in the plugin's `initialize` block.

The required parameters are:

- `method`: a string containing either `linear`, `spline` or `polynomial`
- `x`: an array of numbers
- `y`: an array of numbers
- `input-parameter`: a string containing the name of a value present in the `inputs` array'
- `output-parameter`: a string

You can fix this error by checking you are providing valid values for each parameter in the config.

### Validation errors

There are also several validation errors that can arise, including:

- if the lengths of `x` and `y` are not equal
- if `x` or `y` are empty
- if the requested point to interpolate at is outside the range of `x`

For more information on our error classes, please visit [our docs](https://if.greensoftware.foundation/reference/errors

Commit message:

docs(builtins): add `aggregation-method` to the docs

src/if-run/builtins/interpolation/README.md, after:

# Interpolation Plugin

## Overview

Interpolation is a way to infer new data points from a previously known set of points.
This plugin provides the `y` value at a given `x` by interpolating between known points. You provide a set of known `x`s and `y`s and a target `x`, the plugin returns the `y` for your `x`.

## Usage

To employ the `Interpolation` plugin, adhere to these steps:

1. **Initialize Plugin**: Import the `Interpolation` function and initialize it with global configuration parameters `method`, `x`, `y`, `input-parameter` and `output-parameter`.

2. **Execute Plugin**: Invoke the `execute` method of the initialized plugin instance with an array of input parameters. Each input parameter should include a `timestamp`, `duration` and `[input-parameter]` information.

3. **Result**: The plugin will return an array of plugin parameters enriched with the calculated average carbon intensity for each input.

## Global Config

- `method`: specifies the interpolation method for the data. Acceptable values are 'linear', 'spline', or 'polynomial'. The default method is linear. (optional)
- `x`: array of x points. Numbers should be in ascending order (required).
- `y`: array of y points. Numbers should be in ascending order (required).
- `input-parameter`: a string defining the name to use its value to calculate the interpolation. It should match an existing key in the inputs array (required).
- `output-parameter`: a string defining the name to use to add the result of interpolation with additional calculation (required).

`x` and `y` arrays must be equal lengths.

## Plugin parameter metadata

The `parameter-metadata` section contains information about `description`, `unit` and `aggregation-method` of the parameters of the inputs and outputs

- `inputs`: describe the parameter of the `input-parameter` of the global config. The parameter has the following attributes:

  - `description`: description of the parameter
  - `unit`: unit of the parameter
  - `aggregation-method`: aggregation method of the parameter (it can be `sum`, `avg` or `none`)

- `outputs`: describe the parameters of the `output-parameter` of the global config. The parameter has the following attributes:
  - `description`: description of the parameter
  - `unit`: unit of the parameter
  - `aggregation-method`: aggregation method of the parameter (it can be `sum`, `avg` or `none`)

## Input Parameters

The plugin expects the following input parameters:

- `timestamp`: a timestamp for the input (required)
- `duration`: the amount of time, in seconds, that the input covers. (required)
- `[input-parameter]` - a field whose name matches the string provided to input-parameter in global config (i.e. if the input-parameter in global config is cpu/utilisation then cpu-utilisation must exist in the input data)

## Output

The plugin outputs a value `z` that is the result of looking up the `y` value at `x = 'input-parameter'` using the user-defined interpolation method in `kWh` units. `z` is assigned to a field with a name defined by `output-parameter` in the output data.

## Error Handling

The plugin conducts input validation using the `zod` library and may throw errors if the provided parameters are invalid.

## Plugin Algorithm

1. **Execution**:

   - Validate Global config

     - `method` - validates if the method is one of these methods: `linear`, `spline`, or `polynomial`. If the method isn’t provided, it sets to `linear`.
     - `x` and `y` should be arrays of numbers, the length should be equal, and elements should be ordered in the ascendant order.
     - `input-parameter` - validates if the parameter is string.
     - `output-parameter` - validates if the parameter is string.

   - Iterate through each input, and do corresponding validation and calculation.

   - Validate input parameters

     - `duration` - validate if the duration is a number
     - `timestamp` - should be in string or date format
     - `[input-parameter]` - validates whether the parameter name is included in the input, and if its value should be a number within the range of x points.

   - Calculation

     - If the `method` is provided, choose the right way to calculate. For the `linear` and `polynomial` methods, calculate according to their formulas. For spline interpolation, use the npm module `typescript-cubic-spline`.

2. **Output**: Output the provided input along with the calculated `cpu/energy`

### TypeScript Usage

```ts
const globalConfig = {
  method: 'linear',
  x: [0, 10, 50, 100],
  y: [0.12, 0.32, 0.75, 1.02],
  'input-parameter': 'cpu/utilization'
  'output-parameter': 'cpu/energy'

};

const interpolationPlugin = Interpolation(globalConfig);

const inputs = [
  {
    timestamp: '2024-04-16T12:00:00Z',
    duration: 3600,
    'cpu/utilization': 45
  },
];

const results = interpolationPlugin.execute(inputs);

console.log(results);
```

### Manifest Usage

#### Input

```yaml
name: interpolation-demo
description: simple demo of interpolation plugin
tags:
initialize:
  plugins:
    interpolation:
      method: Interpolation
      path: 'builtin'
      global-config:
        method: linear
        x: [0, 10, 50, 100]
        y: [0.12, 0.32, 0.75, 1.02]
        input-parameter: 'cpu/utilization'
        output-parameter: 'cpu/energy'
tree:
  children:
    child:
      pipeline:
        - interpolation
      inputs:
        - timestamp: 2023-07-06T00:00
          duration: 3600
          cpu/utilization: 45
```

#### Output

```yaml
name: interpolation-demo
description: simple demo of interpolation plugin
tags:
initialize:
  plugins:
    interpolation:
      method: Interpolation
      path: 'builtin'
      global-config:
        method: linear
        x: [0, 10, 50, 100]
        y: [0.12, 0.32, 0.75, 1.02]
        input-parameter: 'cpu/utilization'
        output-parameter: 'cpu/energy'
tree:
  children:
    child:
      pipeline:
        - interpolation
      inputs:
        - timestamp: 2023-07-06T00:00
          duration: 3600
          cpu/utilization: 45
      outputs:
        - timestamp: 2023-07-06T00:00
          duration: 3600
          cpu/utilization: 45
          cpu/energy: 0.00069625
```

You can execute this by passing it to `ie`. Run the impact using the following command from the project root:

```sh
npm i -g @grnsft/if
if-run --manifest ./manifests/examples/interpolation.yml --output ./manifests/outputs/interpolation.yml
```

## Errors

`Interpolation` exposes one of IF's error classes.

## `GlobalConfigError`

### GlobalConfigError

You will receive an error starting `GlobalConfigError: ` if you have not provided the expected configuration data in the plugin's `initialize` block.

The required parameters are:

- `method`: a string containing either `linear`, `spline` or `polynomial`
- `x`: an array of numbers
- `y`: an array of numbers
- `input-parameter`: a string containing the name of a value present in the `inputs` array'
- `output-parameter`: a string

You can fix this error by checking you are providing valid values for each parameter in the config.

### Validation errors

There are also several validation errors that can arise, including:

- if the lengths of `x` and `y` are not equal
- if `x` or `y` are empty
- if the requested point to interpolate at is outside the range of `x`

For more information on our error classes, please visit [our docs](https://if.greensoftware.foundation/reference/errors
