.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/agenda.md, before:

---
name: Agenda
about: The standard agenda template for carbon ql
title: "GSF IEF Meeting Agenda yyyy-mm-dd"
labels: agenda
assignees: ''

---

Time 11:30am (GMT) / 4:00pm (IST) - See the time in your [timezone](https://everytimezone.com/s/e7e219dd)

- Lead – @srini1978 (Microsoft)
- Co-Lead @navveenb (Accenture)
- PM – @jawache (GSF)

## Antitrust Policy
Joint Development Foundation meetings may involve participation by industry competitors, and it is the intention of the Joint Development Foundation to conduct all of its activities in accordance with applicable antitrust and competition laws. It is therefore extremely important that attendees adhere to meeting agendas, and be aware of, and not participate in, any activities that are prohibited under applicable US state, federal or foreign antitrust and competition laws.

If you have questions about these matters, please contact your company counsel or counsel to the Joint Development Foundation, DLA Piper.

## Roll Call
Please add 'Attended' to this issue during the meeting to denote attendance.
Any untracked attendees will be added by the GSF team below:

## Agenda
- [ ] Press Record!

### PRs
- [ ] 

### Discussions
- [ ] 

### Issues
- [ ] Discuss in-progress/blocked issues on project board: https://github.com/orgs/Green-Software-Foundation/projects/26/views/1
- [ ] AOB

Commit message:

Update agenda.md template
updates out of date info in agenda template

Signed-off-by: Joseph Cook <33655003+jmcook1186@users.noreply.github.com>

.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/agenda.md, after:

---
name: Agenda
about: The standard agenda template for Impact Framework
title: "GSF IEF Meeting Agenda yyyy-mm-dd"
labels: agenda
assignees: ''

---

Time 10:30am (GMT) / 4:00pm (IST) - See the time in your [timezone](https://everytimezone.com/s/e7e219dd)

- Lead – @srini1978 (Microsoft)
- Co-Lead @navveenb (Accenture)
- Co-Lead – @jawache (GSF)
- PM - @jmcook1186 (GSF)

## Antitrust Policy
Joint Development Foundation meetings may involve participation by industry competitors, and it is the intention of the Joint Development Foundation to conduct all of its activities in accordance with applicable antitrust and competition laws. It is therefore extremely important that attendees adhere to meeting agendas, and be aware of, and not participate in, any activities that are prohibited under applicable US state, federal or foreign antitrust and competition laws.

If you have questions about these matters, please contact your company counsel or counsel to the Joint Development Foundation, DLA Piper.

## Roll Call
Please add 'Attended' to this issue during the meeting to denote attendance.
Any untracked attendees will be added by the GSF team below:

## Agenda
- [ ] Press Record!

### PRs
- [ ] 

### Discussions
- [ ] 

### Issues
- [ ] Discuss in-progress/blocked issues on project board: https://github.com/orgs/Green-Software-Foundation/projects/26/views/1
- [ ] AOB
