.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/dev-ticket.md, before:

---
name: Dev-ticket
about: General developer ticket
title: ''
labels: ''
assignees: ''

---

<!--- Provide a general summary of the issue in the Title above -->

## Rationale
<!--- Provide the relevant background information to udnerstand why this change is needed -->
<!--- This is where you can provide more details thathelp the reader understand why you want to make this change -->

## Implementation details
<!--- Explain the steps you will take to implement this change. If you do not have specific steps yet, write your implementation ideas or outline general approach -->

## Priority
<!--- How urgent is this issue, and why? -->
<!--- Explain in writing or give a numerical value from 1 (nice-to-have) to 5 (critical) -->

## Scope
<!--- Which parts of the project/codebase does this affect? -->
<!--- What are the possibel downstream impacts or side-effects of this change?? -->

## Size
<!--- How long do you expect this to take? -->
<!--- How many people/person-hours are required? -->

## What does "done" look like?
<!--- Explain what needs to happen in order for this to be considered complete -->

## Does this require updates to documentation or other materials??
<!--- Are there documentation, website or other media changes required after this change is implemented?. -->

## Deadline
<!--- Does this need to happen by a specific date? -->

## Acceptance criteria
<!--- What has to be true for this to get merged? What threshold of testing is acceptable? -->

Commit message:

update dev ticket template (#642)
* fix(package): update dev ticket template

* Update .github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/dev-ticket.md

Signed-off-by: Joseph Cook <33655003+jmcook1186@users.noreply.github.com>

* fix(package): add checkbox examples

* fix(package): make ticket template conform to gsf format

* Update dev-ticket.md

rm reviewer field

Signed-off-by: Joseph Cook <33655003+jmcook1186@users.noreply.github.com>

* fix(package): add given-when-then to acceptance criteria

Signed-off-by: jmc <33655003+jmcook1186@users.noreply.github.com>

* Update dev-ticket.md

Signed-off-by: Asim Hussain <asim@codecraft.tv>

---------

Signed-off-by: Joseph Cook <33655003+jmcook1186@users.noreply.github.com>
Signed-off-by: jmc <33655003+jmcook1186@users.noreply.github.com>
Signed-off-by: Asim Hussain <asim@codecraft.tv>
Co-authored-by: Asim Hussain <asim@codecraft.tv>

.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/dev-ticket.md, after:

---
name: Dev-ticket
about: General developer ticket
title: ''
labels: ''
assignees: ''

---

**What**
<!--- Describe the deliverable -->

**Why**
<!--- Describe why the proposed changes are needed -->

**Context**
<!--- Explain any relevant background -->

**Prerequisites/resources**
<!--- does anything else need to happen to enable this work to be completed? -->

**SoW (scope of work)**
<!--- what specific steps will be taken to address the aims of the ticket? -->
<!--- Include: -->
<!--- details of files to add/update -->
<!--- any documentation updates required-->
<!--- any tests that need adding/updating>
<!--- -->
- [ ] documentation updated
- [ ] test cases added


**Acceptance criteria**

<!--- list the specific tasks that need to be completed in order to achieve the aims of this ticket. Please use checkboxes!

Please use the given-when-then format to describe the acceptance criteria:
-->

**Given** (Setup): Describes the initial state of the system or the preconditions for a change.

**When** (Action): Describes the specific action or behavior that is being tested/changed.

**Then** (Assertion): Defines the expected outcome or behavior of the system after the action in the "When" step is performed.
