src/if-run/builtins/copy-param/README.md, before:

# Copy-param

`copy-param` is a generic plugin that duplicates an existing parameter in the `input` data and assigns it to a new key. You can either keep or delete the original copied parameter. A common use case for this is to rename parameters in the `inputs` array.

You provide the name of the value you want to copy, and a name to assign the copy to. You also toggle a `keep-existing` parameter to either persist or delete the original copied value.

For example, you could copy `energy` into `energy-copy`, with `keep-existing=true`. In this case your inputs:

```yaml
- timestamp: "2023-12-12T00:00:13.000Z",
  duration: 30,
  energy: 30
```

would become

```yaml
- timestamp: "2023-12-12T00:00:13.000Z",
  duration: 30,
  energy: 30
  energy-copy: 30
```

but with `keep-existing=false`, the same inputs would yield:

```yaml
- timestamp: "2023-12-12T00:00:13.000Z",
  duration: 30,
  energy-copy: 30
```

## Parameters

### Config

Three parameters are required in config: `from` and `to` and `keep-existing`.

`from`: an array of strings. Each string should match an existing key in the `inputs` array
`to`: a string defining the name to use to add the result of summing the input parameters to the output array.
`keep-existing`: toggles whether to keep or delete the copied parameter (defined in `to`)

### Plugin parameter metadata

The `parameter-metadata` section contains information about `description` and `unit` of the parameters of the inputs and outputs

- `inputs`: describe the parameter of the `from` of the global config. The parameter has the following attributes:

  - `description`: description of the parameter
  - `unit`: unit of the parameter

- `outputs`: describe the parameters of the `to` of the global config. The parameter has the following attributes:
  - `description`: description of the parameter
  - `unit`: unit of the parameter

### Inputs

As with all plugins, `timestamp` and `duration` are required. The key passed to `from` must exist in the `input` data.

## Returns

The plugin adds a new parameter with the name defined in `to` to the `input` data.

## Implementation

To run the plugin, you must first create an instance of `Copy`. Then, you can call `execute()`.

```typescript
import {Copy} from '.';

const plugin = Copy({
  'keep-existing': true,
  from: 'from-param',
  to: 'to-param',
});

const result = plugin.execute([
  {
    timestamp: '2023-12-12T00:00:13.000Z',
    duration: 30,
    'from-param': 'hello',
  },
]);

console.log(result);
```

## Example manifest

IF users will typically call the plugin as part of a pipeline defined in a manifest file. In this case, instantiating the plugin is handled by and does not have to be done explicitly by the user. The following is an example manifest that calls `copy-param`:

```yaml
name: copy-param
description:
tags:
initialize:
  plugins:
    copy-param:
      path: builtin
      method: Copy
      global-config:
        keep-existing: true
        from: original
        to: copy
tree:
  children:
    child-1:
      pipeline:
        - copy-param
      inputs:
        - timestamp: '2023-12-12T00:00:00.000Z'
          original: 'hello'
```

You can run this example by saving it as `./manifests/examples/copy.yml` and executing the following command from the project root:

```sh
if-run --manifest ./manifests/examples/copy.yml -s
```

The results will be displayed in the console.

Commit message:

docs(builtins): add `aggregation-method` to the docs

src/if-run/builtins/copy-param/README.md, after:

# Copy-param

`copy-param` is a generic plugin that duplicates an existing parameter in the `input` data and assigns it to a new key. You can either keep or delete the original copied parameter. A common use case for this is to rename parameters in the `inputs` array.

You provide the name of the value you want to copy, and a name to assign the copy to. You also toggle a `keep-existing` parameter to either persist or delete the original copied value.

For example, you could copy `energy` into `energy-copy`, with `keep-existing=true`. In this case your inputs:

```yaml
- timestamp: "2023-12-12T00:00:13.000Z",
  duration: 30,
  energy: 30
```

would become

```yaml
- timestamp: "2023-12-12T00:00:13.000Z",
  duration: 30,
  energy: 30
  energy-copy: 30
```

but with `keep-existing=false`, the same inputs would yield:

```yaml
- timestamp: "2023-12-12T00:00:13.000Z",
  duration: 30,
  energy-copy: 30
```

## Parameters

### Config

Three parameters are required in config: `from` and `to` and `keep-existing`.

`from`: an array of strings. Each string should match an existing key in the `inputs` array
`to`: a string defining the name to use to add the result of summing the input parameters to the output array.
`keep-existing`: toggles whether to keep or delete the copied parameter (defined in `to`)

### Plugin parameter metadata

The `parameter-metadata` section contains information about `description`, `unit` and `aggregation-method` of the parameters of the inputs and outputs

- `inputs`: describe the parameter of the `from` of the global config. The parameter has the following attributes:

  - `description`: description of the parameter
  - `unit`: unit of the parameter
  - `aggregation-method`: aggregation method of the parameter (it can be `sum`, `avg` or `none`)

- `outputs`: describe the parameters of the `to` of the global config. The parameter has the following attributes:
  - `description`: description of the parameter
  - `unit`: unit of the parameter
  - `aggregation-method`: aggregation method of the parameter (it can be `sum`, `avg` or `none`)

### Inputs

As with all plugins, `timestamp` and `duration` are required. The key passed to `from` must exist in the `input` data.

## Returns

The plugin adds a new parameter with the name defined in `to` to the `input` data.

## Implementation

To run the plugin, you must first create an instance of `Copy`. Then, you can call `execute()`.

```typescript
import {Copy} from '.';

const plugin = Copy({
  'keep-existing': true,
  from: 'from-param',
  to: 'to-param',
});

const result = plugin.execute([
  {
    timestamp: '2023-12-12T00:00:13.000Z',
    duration: 30,
    'from-param': 'hello',
  },
]);

console.log(result);
```

## Example manifest

IF users will typically call the plugin as part of a pipeline defined in a manifest file. In this case, instantiating the plugin is handled by and does not have to be done explicitly by the user. The following is an example manifest that calls `copy-param`:

```yaml
name: copy-param
description:
tags:
initialize:
  plugins:
    copy-param:
      path: builtin
      method: Copy
      global-config:
        keep-existing: true
        from: original
        to: copy
tree:
  children:
    child-1:
      pipeline:
        - copy-param
      inputs:
        - timestamp: '2023-12-12T00:00:00.000Z'
          original: 'hello'
```

You can run this example by saving it as `./manifests/examples/copy.yml` and executing the following command from the project root:

```sh
if-run --manifest ./manifests/examples/copy.yml -s
```

The results will be displayed in the console.
