src/if-run/builtins/sum/README.md, before:

# Sum

`sum` is a generic plugin for doing arithmetic sums of two or more values in an `input` array.

You provide the names of the values you want to sum, and a name to use to add the sum to the output array.

For example, you could add `cpu/energy` and `network/energy` and name the result `energy`. `energy` would then be added to every observation in your input array as the sum of `cpu/energy` and `network/energy`.

## Parameters

### Plugin config

Two parameters are required in global config: `input-parameters` and `output-parameter`.

`input-parameters`: an array of strings. Each string should match an existing key in the `inputs` array
`output-parameter`: a string defining the name to use to add the result of summing the input parameters to the output array.

### Plugin parameter metadata

The `parameter-metadata` section contains information about `description` and `unit` of the parameters of the inputs and outputs

- `inputs`: describe parameters of the `input-parameters` of the global config. Each parameter has:

  - `description`: description of the parameter
  - `unit`: unit of the parameter

- `outputs`: describe the parameter of the `output-parameter` of the global config. The parameter has the following attributes:
  - `description`: description of the parameter
  - `unit`: unit of the parameter

### Inputs

All of `input-parameters` must be available in the input array.

## Returns

- `output-parameter`: the sum of all `input-parameters` with the parameter name defined by `output-parameter` in global config.

## Calculation

```pseudocode
output = input0 + input1 + input2 ... inputN
```

## Implementation

To run the plugin, you must first create an instance of `Sum`. Then, you can call `execute()`.

```typescript
const config = {
  inputParameters: ['cpu/energy', 'network/energy'],
  outputParameter: 'energy',
};

const sum = Sum(config, parametersMetadata);
const result = sum.execute([
  {
    timestamp: '2021-01-01T00:00:00Z',
    duration: 3600,
    'cpu/energy': 0.001,
    'memory/energy': 0.0005,
  },
]);
```

## Example manifest

IF users will typically call the plugin as part of a pipeline defined in a manifest file. In this case, instantiating the plugin is handled by and does not have to be done explicitly by the user. The following is an example manifest that calls `sum`:

```yaml
name: sum demo
description:
tags:
initialize:
  plugins:
    sum:
      method: Sum
      path: 'builtin'
      global-config:
        input-parameters: ['cpu/energy', 'network/energy']
        output-parameter: 'energy'
      parameter-metadata:
        inputs:
          cpu/energy:
            description: energy consumed by the cpu
            unit: kWh
          network/energy:
            description: energy consumed by data ingress and egress
            unit: kWh
        outputs:
          energy:
            description: sum of energy components
            unit: kWh
tree:
  children:
    child:
      pipeline:
        - sum
      config:
        sum:
      inputs:
        - timestamp: 2023-08-06T00:00
          duration: 3600
          cpu/energy: 0.001
          network/energy: 0.001
```

You can run this example by saving it as `./examples/manifests/sum.yml` and executing the following command from the project root:

```sh
if-run --manifest ./examples/manifests/sum.yml --output ./examples/outputs/sum.yml
```

The results will be saved to a new `yaml` file in `./examples/outputs`.

## Errors

`Sum` exposes two of the IF error classes.

### GlobalConfigError

You will receive an error starting `GlobalConfigError: ` if you have not provided the expected configuration data in the plugin's `initialize` block.

The required parameters are:

- `input-parameters`: this must be an array of strings, each being the name of a value in the `inputs` array
- `output-parameter`: this must be a string

You can fix this error by checking you are providing valid values for each parameter in the config.

### `MissingInputDataError`

This error arises when a necessary piece of input data is missing from the `inputs` array.
Every element in the ``inputs` array must contain:

- `timestamp`
- `duration`
- whatever values you passed to `input-parameters`

For more information on our error classes, please visit [our docs](https://if.greensoftware.foundation/reference/errors).

Commit message:

docs(builtins): add `aggregation-method` to the docs

src/if-run/builtins/sum/README.md, after:

# Sum

`sum` is a generic plugin for doing arithmetic sums of two or more values in an `input` array.

You provide the names of the values you want to sum, and a name to use to add the sum to the output array.

For example, you could add `cpu/energy` and `network/energy` and name the result `energy`. `energy` would then be added to every observation in your input array as the sum of `cpu/energy` and `network/energy`.

## Parameters

### Plugin config

Two parameters are required in global config: `input-parameters` and `output-parameter`.

`input-parameters`: an array of strings. Each string should match an existing key in the `inputs` array
`output-parameter`: a string defining the name to use to add the result of summing the input parameters to the output array.

### Plugin parameter metadata

The `parameter-metadata` section contains information about `description`, `unit` and `aggregation-method` of the parameters of the inputs and outputs

- `inputs`: describe parameters of the `input-parameters` of the global config. Each parameter has:

  - `description`: description of the parameter
  - `unit`: unit of the parameter
  - `aggregation-method`: aggregation method of the parameter (it can be `sum`, `avg` or `none`)

- `outputs`: describe the parameter of the `output-parameter` of the global config. The parameter has the following attributes:
  - `description`: description of the parameter
  - `unit`: unit of the parameter
  - `aggregation-method`: aggregation method of the parameter (it can be `sum`, `avg` or `none`)

### Inputs

All of `input-parameters` must be available in the input array.

## Returns

- `output-parameter`: the sum of all `input-parameters` with the parameter name defined by `output-parameter` in global config.

## Calculation

```pseudocode
output = input0 + input1 + input2 ... inputN
```

## Implementation

To run the plugin, you must first create an instance of `Sum`. Then, you can call `execute()`.

```typescript
const config = {
  inputParameters: ['cpu/energy', 'network/energy'],
  outputParameter: 'energy',
};

const sum = Sum(config, parametersMetadata);
const result = sum.execute([
  {
    timestamp: '2021-01-01T00:00:00Z',
    duration: 3600,
    'cpu/energy': 0.001,
    'memory/energy': 0.0005,
  },
]);
```

## Example manifest

IF users will typically call the plugin as part of a pipeline defined in a manifest file. In this case, instantiating the plugin is handled by and does not have to be done explicitly by the user. The following is an example manifest that calls `sum`:

```yaml
name: sum demo
description:
tags:
initialize:
  plugins:
    sum:
      method: Sum
      path: 'builtin'
      global-config:
        input-parameters: ['cpu/energy', 'network/energy']
        output-parameter: 'energy'
      parameter-metadata:
        inputs:
          cpu/energy:
            description: energy consumed by the cpu
            unit: kWh
          network/energy:
            description: energy consumed by data ingress and egress
            unit: kWh
        outputs:
          energy:
            description: sum of energy components
            unit: kWh
tree:
  children:
    child:
      pipeline:
        - sum
      config:
        sum:
      inputs:
        - timestamp: 2023-08-06T00:00
          duration: 3600
          cpu/energy: 0.001
          network/energy: 0.001
```

You can run this example by saving it as `./examples/manifests/sum.yml` and executing the following command from the project root:

```sh
if-run --manifest ./examples/manifests/sum.yml --output ./examples/outputs/sum.yml
```

The results will be saved to a new `yaml` file in `./examples/outputs`.

## Errors

`Sum` exposes two of the IF error classes.

### GlobalConfigError

You will receive an error starting `GlobalConfigError: ` if you have not provided the expected configuration data in the plugin's `initialize` block.

The required parameters are:

- `input-parameters`: this must be an array of strings, each being the name of a value in the `inputs` array
- `output-parameter`: this must be a string

You can fix this error by checking you are providing valid values for each parameter in the config.

### `MissingInputDataError`

This error arises when a necessary piece of input data is missing from the `inputs` array.
Every element in the ``inputs` array must contain:

- `timestamp`
- `duration`
- whatever values you passed to `input-parameters`

For more information on our error classes, please visit [our docs](https://if.greensoftware.foundation/reference/errors).
